.codebuddy/skills/review/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: review
description: Multi-round automated code review and fix using Agent Teams. Use when the user invokes /review to review and fix code or document issues across a branch or pull request.
---

# Review — Automated Code Review & Fix

Automatically review, verify, and fix issues in code and documents across your branch
or pull request. Runs multi-round team-based iterations until no valid issues remain.

Each issue is assigned a risk level. Low-risk issues can be auto-fixed, while
high-risk issues are presented for user confirmation. For PR reviews of other people's
code, issues are submitted as PR review comments instead of direct commits.

## Instructions

- All user-facing interactions must use the language the user has been using in the
  conversation. Do not default to English.
- When presenting choices with predefined options, use interactive dialogs with
  selectable options rather than plain text.
- **You (the team-lead) never modify files directly.** Delegate all changes to agents.
  Read code only for arbitration and diagnosis.
- After each round, analyze review quality and adjust the next round's reviewer prompts.
- **Autonomous operation**: between Phase 0 (setup) and Phase 3.5 (deferred issue
  confirmation), and between Phase 3.5 and Phase 7 (final report), the process runs
  without user interaction. The team-lead must handle all unexpected situations
  autonomously — e.g., an agent stuck or unresponsive, a fix that breaks the build,
  a git operation that fails, an agent producing invalid output. Use your judgment:
  terminate and replace, revert and retry, skip and move on, etc. Anything that cannot
  be resolved automatically should be recorded to `pending-issues.md` for user review
  in Phase 7.

## References

| Topic | File |
|-------|------|
| Code review checklist (Priority A-C + exclusions) | `references/code-checklist.md` |
| Document review checklist (Priority A-C + exclusions) | `references/doc-checklist.md` |
| Issue filtering & risk level judgment matrix | `references/judgment-matrix.md` |
| Pending issue template | `references/pending-templates.md` |
| Fixer agent instructions | `references/fixer-instructions.md` |
| PR review comment format | `references/pr-comment-format.md` |

---

## Phase 0: Scope Confirmation & Environment Check

### 0.1 Scope Resolution

Parse `$ARGUMENTS` to determine the review mode and scope:

| `$ARGUMENTS` | Detection | Mode | Scope |
|--------------|-----------|------|-------|
| (empty) | — | **Local** | Current branch vs upstream (diff) |
| PR number (e.g., `123`) | `gh pr view` succeeds | **PR** | PR diff vs base branch |
| PR URL | Extract owner/repo/number, verify | **PR** | PR diff vs base branch |
| Single commit (e.g., `abc123`) | `git rev-parse --verify` succeeds | **Local** | That commit's changes (`git show`) |
| Commit range (e.g., `abc..def`) | Contains `..`, both endpoints valid | **Local** | Diff between two commits (excluding first) |
| File/directory paths (space-separated) | All paths exist on disk | **Local** | Full content review (no diff) |

**Parse order**: contains `..` -> commit range; single arg + `gh pr view` succeeds ->
PR; all args exist on disk -> file/directory paths; single arg + `git rev-parse`
succeeds -> single commit; otherwise -> error.

**PR URL mismatch**: if the URL's owner/repo does not match the current repository
(`gh repo view --json nameWithOwner -q '.nameWithOwner'`), abort and ask the user to
run `/review` from the correct repository.

**Empty arguments (default)**: use the current branch's upstream tracking branch as the
base. If no upstream is configured, fall back to `main` (or `master`).

#### PR mode setup

1. **Verify `gh` is available**: run `gh --version`. If not installed, inform the user
   (macOS: `brew install gh`, others: https://cli.github.com) and abort.

2. **Fetch PR metadata** (single API call):
   ```
   gh pr view {number} --json headRefName,author,headRefOid
   ```
   Extract: `PR_BRANCH`, `PR_AUTHOR`, `HEAD_SHA`.

3. **Determine code ownership**: compare `PR_AUTHOR` with `gh api user -q '.login'`.
   Store result as `IS_OWN_PR` (true/false).

4. **Prepare working directory**:
   - If current branch equals `PR_BRANCH` -> use current directory directly.
   - Otherwise -> create a worktree:
     ```
     git fetch origin pull/{number}/head:pr-{number}
     git worktree add /tmp/pr-review-{number} pr-{number}
     ```
     All subsequent operations use the worktree directory. Record `WORKTREE_DIR` for
     cleanup in Phase 7.

5. **Fetch existing PR comments** for reviewer context:
   ```
   gh pr view {number} --comments
   ```
   Include in reviewer prompts so they avoid re-reporting already-discussed issues.

6. **Set review scope**: diff between base branch and `HEAD` in the PR branch.
   ```
   git fetch origin main
   git diff $(git merge-base origin/main HEAD)
   ```

### 0.2 Review Priority Level

Skip this question if the scope contains **only** document files (doc modules use their
full checklist automatically). When skipped, all priority levels (A+B+C) are checked.

**Question 1 — Review priority** (code/mixed modules):
- Option 1 — "Priority A only": correctness and safety issues
- Option 2 — "Priority A + B": also include refactoring and optimization
- Option 3 — "All (A + B + C)": also include conventions and documentation

### 0.3 Auto-Fix Threshold Selection

The available options depend on code ownership:

**Own code** (local mode, or PR mode with `IS_OWN_PR = true`):

**Question 2 — Auto-fix threshold**:
- Option 1 — "Low risk only": auto-fix unambiguous local fixes (null checks, comment
  typos, naming, `reserve`). Confirm everything else.
- Option 2 — "Low + Medium risk": also auto-fix clear multi-location fixes (extract
  shared logic, remove unused internals). Only confirm high-risk decisions (API
  changes, architecture, algorithm trade-offs).
- Option 3 — "All confirm": no auto-fix, review every issue before fixing.

**Other's PR** (`IS_OWN_PR = false`):

Threshold is automatically set to **all confirm** with PR comment output. Inform the
user: "This is someone else's PR. Issues will be presented for you to select which ones
to submit as PR review comments."

### 0.4 Pre-flight Checks

All checks that might require user action are performed here, before the automated
process begins. Complete all checks before proceeding to module partitioning.

**Agent Teams availability**:
- Verify Agent Teams is enabled. If not available, prompt the user to enable it and
  abort.

**Clean branch check**:
- **PR mode (worktree)**: skip — the worktree is always clean.
- **PR mode (current branch is PR branch)**: verify no uncommitted changes. If dirty,
  abort and ask the user to resolve first.
- **Local mode**: verify not on the main/master branch (abort if so). If there are
  uncommitted changes and the threshold has auto-fix, abort and ask the user to commit
  or stash first.

**Environment verification** (skip for other's PR — no fixes will be committed):
- Detect build and test commands from project rules or by exploring the codebase.
- If no automated tests are found, warn the user: without tests, fix validation cannot
  run. Abort unless the user confirms to continue.
- Run build and test to establish baseline. Fail = abort.

**Reference material** (doc/mixed modules only):
- Auto-discover relevant best-practice guides, official documentation, or specification
  standards for the document type being reviewed.
- Ask the user if they have additional reference material (file paths, URLs, or inline
  instructions). The user may skip.

After all checks pass, no further user interaction until Phase 3.5 (deferred issue
confirmation) and Phase 7 (final report).

### 0.5 Module Partitioning

Partition files in scope into **review modules** for parallel review.

- Each module is a self-contained logical unit. Split large files by section/function
  group; group related small files together. Balance workload across reviewers.
- Classify each module as `code`, `doc`, or `mixed` to determine which checklist to use.

**Fix modules** are determined in Phase 3: group confirmed issues **by file** (one
fixer per file to prevent concurrent edit conflicts). Cross-file issues go to a
dedicated `fixer-cross` agent.

### Mid-Review Supplements

The user may send additional material at any time. Forward it to relevant active agents;
if those modules are already reviewed, include the material in the next round instead.

---

## Phase 1: Review

- Create the team.
- One `general-purpose` reviewer agent (`reviewer-N`) per module
- Reviewer prompt includes:
  - Module file list + checklist matching the module type:
    `references/code-checklist.md` for code modules, `references/doc-checklist.md` for
    doc modules, both for mixed modules. Only include priority levels selected by the
    user (e.g., if user chose "A + B", do not include Priority C items).
  - **Review scope rule**: reviewers must read entire files for full context, but apply
    different reporting thresholds based on scope type:
    - **Diff-based scope** (branch diff, PR, commit, commit range): report issues at
      the selected priority levels for code within the diff. For code outside the diff,
      only report Priority A issues.
    - **Full content scope** (file/directory path): report issues at the selected
      priority levels for all code in the files.
  - **Evidence requirement**: every issue must have a code citation (file:line + snippet)
  - **Exclusion list**: see the exclusion section in the corresponding checklist. Project
    rules loaded in context take priority over the exclusion list.
  - **Public API protection**: no signature/interface changes unless obvious bug or
    comment issue
  - **PR context** (PR mode only): include existing PR comments so reviewers avoid
    re-reporting already-discussed issues
  - Structured output format

---

## Phase 2: Verification

- **Do not close reviewers yet** (may reuse as fixers in Phase 4)
- Create independent verifier (`verifier-N`) per review module with issues
- Verifier reads actual code to confirm each issue. Send results back to the reviewer
  for second confirmation. If they disagree, team-lead reads code to judge.

---

## Phase 3: Filter & Risk Assessment — Team-Lead Only

For each confirmed issue, decide whether to fix and assign a risk level. Consult
`references/judgment-matrix.md` for the full matrix, risk level definitions, and
special rules.

### Risk level assignment

Assign each fixable issue a risk level (low / medium / high) based on the judgment
matrix. The user's chosen auto-fix threshold determines handling:
- Issues at or below the threshold -> queued for auto-fix (Phase 4)
- Issues above the threshold -> deferred to Phase 3.5 for user confirmation

### Key points

- For each fixable issue, check whether the change also requires updates to comments
  or documentation outside the fixer's module — if so, create a follow-up for
  `fixer-cross`.
- Previously rolled-back issues -> do not attempt again

---

## Phase 3.5: Deferred Issue Confirmation

This phase is the **only mid-process user interaction point**. It handles issues above
the user's auto-fix threshold. Issues at or below the threshold have already been
queued for auto-fix and proceed directly to Phase 4.

If there are no deferred issues, skip this phase entirely.

### Present deferred issues

1. Present all deferred issues (from current round and any remaining from previous
   rounds) to the user in a compact numbered list. Each entry should fit on one line:
   `[number] [file:line] [risk] — [description]`

2. Ask the user which issues to act on. The user can:
   - Enter issue numbers (e.g., "1,3,5" or "1-5,8")
   - Enter "all" to act on all deferred issues
   - Enter "none" or leave empty to skip all deferred issues

3. **Action depends on mode**:
   - **Local mode / own PR**: selected issues are added to the fix queue for Phase 4.
   - **Other's PR**: all confirmed issues (regardless of risk level) are presented in
     this list. User selects which to submit as PR review comments (see below), then
     skip to Phase 7 (no fix loop for other's PR).

4. If both the auto-fix queue and user selection are empty -> skip Phase 4-5, go
   directly to Phase 6 termination check.

### PR Review Comments (other's PR)

Submit selected issues as a single GitHub PR review using the format in
`references/pr-comment-format.md`. Comment body should be concise, written in the
user's conversation language, and include a specific fix suggestion when possible.

---

## Phase 4: Fix

- Group confirmed issues into **fix modules by file** (see 0.5). Reuse reviewers as
  fixers when they already have context for a file.
- Cross-file issues -> `fixer-cross` agent; multi-file renames -> single atomic task

### Fixer Instructions (include in every fixer prompt)

Include `references/fixer-instructions.md` verbatim in every fixer agent's prompt.
Team-lead collects skipped issues and includes them in the next round's context.

---

## Phase 5: Validate

- **Do not close reviewers yet** (may need retry)
- For code/mixed modules: build + test using the project's commands
- For doc-only modules: skip build/test; validation is done through review phases

**All pass** (or no code modules to validate) -> close all reviewers/fixers -> Phase 6.

**Failures**: bisect to locate the bad commit, revert it, and send failure info back
to the original fixer for retry (max 2 retries). If still failing, revert and record
to `pending-issues.md`. Close all agents when resolved.

---

## Phase 6: Loop

- Close the team to release all agents.
- **Other's PR**: skip this phase entirely — no fix loop. Go directly to Phase 7
  after PR review comments are submitted in Phase 3.5.

### Termination check

- If no new issues were found in this round (Phase 3 valid issues = 0) -> Phase 7
- Otherwise -> create new team, back to Phase 1

### Next round context

Next round prompt includes: rollback blacklist, previous fix summary,
pending file contents, **deferred issue list** (issues above threshold that the user
has not yet acted on), and prompt adjustments based on review quality analysis.
Reviewers must skip all issues already reported in previous rounds — whether fixed,
rolled back, recorded to pending files, declined by the user, or still awaiting
confirmation.

---

## Phase 7: Final Report & Cleanup

### Step 1: Pending item confirmation

1. Check `pending-issues.md`
2. Empty -> proceed to step 2
3. Has content -> present to user for item-by-item confirmation
4. Approved fixes -> create agent to re-apply; rejected -> discard
5. Final build + test

### Step 2: PR mode — push fixes (own PR only)

If fixes were made in PR mode and `IS_OWN_PR = true`, push all commits to the PR
branch. If push fails, inform the user — commits remain local for manual push.

### Step 3: PR mode — worktree cleanup

If `WORKTREE_DIR` was created, clean up after push is verified:
```
cd {original_directory}
git worktree remove {WORKTREE_DIR}
git branch -D pr-{number}
```

### Step 4: Summary Report

- Total rounds and per-round fix count/type statistics
- Issues found vs issues fixed (also show issues the user declined)
- Rolled-back issues and reasons
- Pending items and their resolution
- Final test result
- **PR mode**: list commits pushed (own PR) or review comments submitted (other's PR)

Delete pending files after report.

---

## Troubleshooting

### PR URL does not match current repository
The PR belongs to a different repository. Run `/review` from the correct repo.

### gh CLI not installed or not authenticated
PR mode requires `gh`. Install with `brew install gh` (macOS) or see
https://cli.github.com, then run `gh auth login`.

Commit message:

Clarify Phase 2 verification as reviewer self-check then independent verifier then alignment.

.codebuddy/skills/review/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: review
description: Multi-round automated code review and fix using Agent Teams. Use when the user invokes /review to review and fix code or document issues across a branch or pull request.
---

# Review — Automated Code Review & Fix

Automatically review, verify, and fix issues in code and documents across your branch
or pull request. Runs multi-round team-based iterations until no valid issues remain.

Each issue is assigned a risk level. Low-risk issues can be auto-fixed, while
high-risk issues are presented for user confirmation. For PR reviews of other people's
code, issues are submitted as PR review comments instead of direct commits.

## Instructions

- All user-facing interactions must use the language the user has been using in the
  conversation. Do not default to English.
- When presenting choices with predefined options, use interactive dialogs with
  selectable options rather than plain text.
- **You (the team-lead) never modify files directly.** Delegate all changes to agents.
  Read code only for arbitration and diagnosis.
- After each round, analyze review quality and adjust the next round's reviewer prompts.
- **Autonomous operation**: between Phase 0 (setup) and Phase 3.5 (deferred issue
  confirmation), and between Phase 3.5 and Phase 7 (final report), the process runs
  without user interaction. The team-lead must handle all unexpected situations
  autonomously — e.g., an agent stuck or unresponsive, a fix that breaks the build,
  a git operation that fails, an agent producing invalid output. Use your judgment:
  terminate and replace, revert and retry, skip and move on, etc. Anything that cannot
  be resolved automatically should be recorded to `pending-issues.md` for user review
  in Phase 7.

## References

| Topic | File |
|-------|------|
| Code review checklist (Priority A-C + exclusions) | `references/code-checklist.md` |
| Document review checklist (Priority A-C + exclusions) | `references/doc-checklist.md` |
| Issue filtering & risk level judgment matrix | `references/judgment-matrix.md` |
| Pending issue template | `references/pending-templates.md` |
| Fixer agent instructions | `references/fixer-instructions.md` |
| PR review comment format | `references/pr-comment-format.md` |

---

## Phase 0: Scope Confirmation & Environment Check

### 0.1 Scope Resolution

Parse `$ARGUMENTS` to determine the review mode and scope:

| `$ARGUMENTS` | Detection | Mode | Scope |
|--------------|-----------|------|-------|
| (empty) | — | **Local** | Current branch vs upstream (diff) |
| PR number (e.g., `123`) | `gh pr view` succeeds | **PR** | PR diff vs base branch |
| PR URL | Extract owner/repo/number, verify | **PR** | PR diff vs base branch |
| Single commit (e.g., `abc123`) | `git rev-parse --verify` succeeds | **Local** | That commit's changes (`git show`) |
| Commit range (e.g., `abc..def`) | Contains `..`, both endpoints valid | **Local** | Diff between two commits (excluding first) |
| File/directory paths (space-separated) | All paths exist on disk | **Local** | Full content review (no diff) |

**Parse order**: contains `..` -> commit range; single arg + `gh pr view` succeeds ->
PR; all args exist on disk -> file/directory paths; single arg + `git rev-parse`
succeeds -> single commit; otherwise -> error.

**PR URL mismatch**: if the URL's owner/repo does not match the current repository
(`gh repo view --json nameWithOwner -q '.nameWithOwner'`), abort and ask the user to
run `/review` from the correct repository.

**Empty arguments (default)**: use the current branch's upstream tracking branch as the
base. If no upstream is configured, fall back to `main` (or `master`).

#### PR mode setup

1. **Verify `gh` is available**: run `gh --version`. If not installed, inform the user
   (macOS: `brew install gh`, others: https://cli.github.com) and abort.

2. **Fetch PR metadata** (single API call):
   ```
   gh pr view {number} --json headRefName,author,headRefOid
   ```
   Extract: `PR_BRANCH`, `PR_AUTHOR`, `HEAD_SHA`.

3. **Determine code ownership**: compare `PR_AUTHOR` with `gh api user -q '.login'`.
   Store result as `IS_OWN_PR` (true/false).

4. **Prepare working directory**:
   - If current branch equals `PR_BRANCH` -> use current directory directly.
   - Otherwise -> create a worktree:
     ```
     git fetch origin pull/{number}/head:pr-{number}
     git worktree add /tmp/pr-review-{number} pr-{number}
     ```
     All subsequent operations use the worktree directory. Record `WORKTREE_DIR` for
     cleanup in Phase 7.

5. **Fetch existing PR comments** for reviewer context:
   ```
   gh pr view {number} --comments
   ```
   Include in reviewer prompts so they avoid re-reporting already-discussed issues.

6. **Set review scope**: diff between base branch and `HEAD` in the PR branch.
   ```
   git fetch origin main
   git diff $(git merge-base origin/main HEAD)
   ```

### 0.2 Review Priority Level

Skip this question if the scope contains **only** document files (doc modules use their
full checklist automatically). When skipped, all priority levels (A+B+C) are checked.

**Question 1 — Review priority** (code/mixed modules):
- Option 1 — "Priority A only": correctness and safety issues
- Option 2 — "Priority A + B": also include refactoring and optimization
- Option 3 — "All (A + B + C)": also include conventions and documentation

### 0.3 Auto-Fix Threshold Selection

The available options depend on code ownership:

**Own code** (local mode, or PR mode with `IS_OWN_PR = true`):

**Question 2 — Auto-fix threshold**:
- Option 1 — "Low risk only": auto-fix unambiguous local fixes (null checks, comment
  typos, naming, `reserve`). Confirm everything else.
- Option 2 — "Low + Medium risk": also auto-fix clear multi-location fixes (extract
  shared logic, remove unused internals). Only confirm high-risk decisions (API
  changes, architecture, algorithm trade-offs).
- Option 3 — "All confirm": no auto-fix, review every issue before fixing.

**Other's PR** (`IS_OWN_PR = false`):

Threshold is automatically set to **all confirm** with PR comment output. Inform the
user: "This is someone else's PR. Issues will be presented for you to select which ones
to submit as PR review comments."

### 0.4 Pre-flight Checks

All checks that might require user action are performed here, before the automated
process begins. Complete all checks before proceeding to module partitioning.

**Agent Teams availability**:
- Verify Agent Teams is enabled. If not available, prompt the user to enable it and
  abort.

**Clean branch check**:
- **PR mode (worktree)**: skip — the worktree is always clean.
- **PR mode (current branch is PR branch)**: verify no uncommitted changes. If dirty,
  abort and ask the user to resolve first.
- **Local mode**: verify not on the main/master branch (abort if so). If there are
  uncommitted changes and the threshold has auto-fix, abort and ask the user to commit
  or stash first.

**Environment verification** (skip for other's PR — no fixes will be committed):
- Detect build and test commands from project rules or by exploring the codebase.
- If no automated tests are found, warn the user: without tests, fix validation cannot
  run. Abort unless the user confirms to continue.
- Run build and test to establish baseline. Fail = abort.

**Reference material** (doc/mixed modules only):
- Auto-discover relevant best-practice guides, official documentation, or specification
  standards for the document type being reviewed.
- Ask the user if they have additional reference material (file paths, URLs, or inline
  instructions). The user may skip.

After all checks pass, no further user interaction until Phase 3.5 (deferred issue
confirmation) and Phase 7 (final report).

### 0.5 Module Partitioning

Partition files in scope into **review modules** for parallel review.

- Each module is a self-contained logical unit. Split large files by section/function
  group; group related small files together. Balance workload across reviewers.
- Classify each module as `code`, `doc`, or `mixed` to determine which checklist to use.

**Fix modules** are determined in Phase 3: group confirmed issues **by file** (one
fixer per file to prevent concurrent edit conflicts). Cross-file issues go to a
dedicated `fixer-cross` agent.

### Mid-Review Supplements

The user may send additional material at any time. Forward it to relevant active agents;
if those modules are already reviewed, include the material in the next round instead.

---

## Phase 1: Review

- Create the team.
- One `general-purpose` reviewer agent (`reviewer-N`) per module
- Reviewer prompt includes:
  - Module file list + checklist matching the module type:
    `references/code-checklist.md` for code modules, `references/doc-checklist.md` for
    doc modules, both for mixed modules. Only include priority levels selected by the
    user (e.g., if user chose "A + B", do not include Priority C items).
  - **Review scope rule**: reviewers must read entire files for full context, but apply
    different reporting thresholds based on scope type:
    - **Diff-based scope** (branch diff, PR, commit, commit range): report issues at
      the selected priority levels for code within the diff. For code outside the diff,
      only report Priority A issues.
    - **Full content scope** (file/directory path): report issues at the selected
      priority levels for all code in the files.
  - **Evidence requirement**: every issue must have a code citation (file:line + snippet)
  - **Exclusion list**: see the exclusion section in the corresponding checklist. Project
    rules loaded in context take priority over the exclusion list.
  - **Public API protection**: no signature/interface changes unless obvious bug or
    comment issue
  - **PR context** (PR mode only): include existing PR comments so reviewers avoid
    re-reporting already-discussed issues
  - Structured output format

---

## Phase 2: Verification

- **Do not close reviewers yet** (may reuse as fixers in Phase 4)
- **Reviewer self-check**: each reviewer re-reads the relevant code and self-verifies
  every issue they reported, marking each as confirmed or withdrawn.
- **Independent verification**: create a verifier (`verifier-N`) per review module.
  The verifier reads actual code to independently confirm each issue.
- **Alignment**: send verifier results back to the reviewer for comparison with their
  self-check. If they disagree on any issue, team-lead reads code to judge.

---

## Phase 3: Filter & Risk Assessment — Team-Lead Only

For each confirmed issue, decide whether to fix and assign a risk level. Consult
`references/judgment-matrix.md` for the full matrix, risk level definitions, and
special rules.

### Risk level assignment

Assign each fixable issue a risk level (low / medium / high) based on the judgment
matrix. The user's chosen auto-fix threshold determines handling:
- Issues at or below the threshold -> queued for auto-fix (Phase 4)
- Issues above the threshold -> deferred to Phase 3.5 for user confirmation

### Key points

- For each fixable issue, check whether the change also requires updates to comments
  or documentation outside the fixer's module — if so, create a follow-up for
  `fixer-cross`.
- Previously rolled-back issues -> do not attempt again

---

## Phase 3.5: Deferred Issue Confirmation

This phase is the **only mid-process user interaction point**. It handles issues above
the user's auto-fix threshold. Issues at or below the threshold have already been
queued for auto-fix and proceed directly to Phase 4.

If there are no deferred issues, skip this phase entirely.

### Present deferred issues

1. Present all deferred issues (from current round and any remaining from previous
   rounds) to the user in a compact numbered list. Each entry should fit on one line:
   `[number] [file:line] [risk] — [description]`

2. Ask the user which issues to act on. The user can:
   - Enter issue numbers (e.g., "1,3,5" or "1-5,8")
   - Enter "all" to act on all deferred issues
   - Enter "none" or leave empty to skip all deferred issues

3. **Action depends on mode**:
   - **Local mode / own PR**: selected issues are added to the fix queue for Phase 4.
   - **Other's PR**: all confirmed issues (regardless of risk level) are presented in
     this list. User selects which to submit as PR review comments (see below), then
     skip to Phase 7 (no fix loop for other's PR).

4. If both the auto-fix queue and user selection are empty -> skip Phase 4-5, go
   directly to Phase 6 termination check.

### PR Review Comments (other's PR)

Submit selected issues as a single GitHub PR review using the format in
`references/pr-comment-format.md`. Comment body should be concise, written in the
user's conversation language, and include a specific fix suggestion when possible.

---

## Phase 4: Fix

- Group confirmed issues into **fix modules by file** (see 0.5). Reuse reviewers as
  fixers when they already have context for a file.
- Cross-file issues -> `fixer-cross` agent; multi-file renames -> single atomic task

### Fixer Instructions (include in every fixer prompt)

Include `references/fixer-instructions.md` verbatim in every fixer agent's prompt.
Team-lead collects skipped issues and includes them in the next round's context.

---

## Phase 5: Validate

- **Do not close reviewers yet** (may need retry)
- For code/mixed modules: build + test using the project's commands
- For doc-only modules: skip build/test; validation is done through review phases

**All pass** (or no code modules to validate) -> close all reviewers/fixers -> Phase 6.

**Failures**: bisect to locate the bad commit, revert it, and send failure info back
to the original fixer for retry (max 2 retries). If still failing, revert and record
to `pending-issues.md`. Close all agents when resolved.

---

## Phase 6: Loop

- Close the team to release all agents.
- **Other's PR**: skip this phase entirely — no fix loop. Go directly to Phase 7
  after PR review comments are submitted in Phase 3.5.

### Termination check

- If no new issues were found in this round (Phase 3 valid issues = 0) -> Phase 7
- Otherwise -> create new team, back to Phase 1

### Next round context

Next round prompt includes: rollback blacklist, previous fix summary,
pending file contents, **deferred issue list** (issues above threshold that the user
has not yet acted on), and prompt adjustments based on review quality analysis.
Reviewers must skip all issues already reported in previous rounds — whether fixed,
rolled back, recorded to pending files, declined by the user, or still awaiting
confirmation.

---

## Phase 7: Final Report & Cleanup

### Step 1: Pending item confirmation

1. Check `pending-issues.md`
2. Empty -> proceed to step 2
3. Has content -> present to user for item-by-item confirmation
4. Approved fixes -> create agent to re-apply; rejected -> discard
5. Final build + test

### Step 2: PR mode — push fixes (own PR only)

If fixes were made in PR mode and `IS_OWN_PR = true`, push all commits to the PR
branch. If push fails, inform the user — commits remain local for manual push.

### Step 3: PR mode — worktree cleanup

If `WORKTREE_DIR` was created, clean up after push is verified:
```
cd {original_directory}
git worktree remove {WORKTREE_DIR}
git branch -D pr-{number}
```

### Step 4: Summary Report

- Total rounds and per-round fix count/type statistics
- Issues found vs issues fixed (also show issues the user declined)
- Rolled-back issues and reasons
- Pending items and their resolution
- Final test result
- **PR mode**: list commits pushed (own PR) or review comments submitted (other's PR)

Delete pending files after report.

---

## Troubleshooting

### PR URL does not match current repository
The PR belongs to a different repository. Run `/review` from the correct repo.

### gh CLI not installed or not authenticated
PR mode requires `gh`. Install with `brew install gh` (macOS) or see
https://cli.github.com, then run `gh auth login`.
